So, for what it's worth, I spent a lot
of my time contemplating the reward
ecosystem and mostly raging against it
because it is one of the less documented
wealth transfers. And by the way, the
credit card industry in general is a
regressive wealth transfer where people
who never revolve transactors like
probably both of you and and me when I
do use credit cards, which is really
rare these days, we're paying our bills
at the end of the month. We're not
paying a penny of interest. I think
Joe's on the record saying you've never
paid any interest. And so I think that's
a that that's a nice place to be if you
can afford it. Telling people that they
should just not borrow and pay it off at
the end of the month is an incredibly
let them eat cake equivalent for the
21st century payments. Lots of people in
America revolve. Half the country
revolves in a $10,000. And so the idea
of those people caring about rewards is
sort of preposterous. They do not. They
they care about making their minimum
payment.
Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OddLots podcast. I'm Joe Weisenthal
>> and I'm Tracy Aloway.
>> Tracy, it feels like uh everybody
whether uh they want to come after the
banks, right? There is this effort so
many of our episodes, whether we're
talking about crypto, whether we're
talking about private credit, whether
we're talking about payments, it's this
goal, this dream of like, let's chip
away at some of these bank businesses or
these businesses that were associated
with some sort of legacy institutions.
The banks, they mostly seem to be doing
pretty well still, but there's this
dream that they can all be sort of like
disintermediated away or that someone
could each one of these functions that
they do can be better done somewhere
else.
>> Yeah. Um, so let's see. I have been in
financial journalism for almost 20 years
now, which is kind of crazy and makes me
feel very old. But for as long as I can
remember, someone has been trying to
either reinvent bank lending or reinvent
the payment space.
>> And I I guess I can see a few reasons.
So like genuinely some payment
architecture is really old-fashioned.
Yeah. Especially in the US where you
know sometimes you still have to write a
check for something which blows my mind.
Um, and the US didn't get chips for a
really long time, chips and credit cards
and stuff like that. But also, if you
think about the payment and lending and
financial market just in general, it's
one of the biggest out there, right?
Like you're talking about all the
economic activity basically. And so if
you can get a tiny slice of that through
interchange or fees, then you can see
how people, you know, people are really
interested in that space.
>> No, completely. And we know that there
are a lot of like fintech companies for
a long time. I mean some of the most you
know the earliest internet success
stories period were you know this is
definitely nothing new. And of course
one of the first ever was PayPal which
recognized that with the internet was
going to come all kinds of new
opportunities for payments and sort of
quasi peer-to-peer literal peer-to-peer
uh transactions etc. PayPal is still of
course extremely important part of the
payments infrastructure etc. Um but
yeah, there's so much going on, but to
your point, lots of companies have
gotten those little slices and made
incredible fortunes.
>> Yeah. Um we also did an episode on buy
now pay later um a couple months ago and
there are clearly some interesting
questions brought up by the expansion of
that space and you and I talked about
how wherever you go on the internet
nowadays, you get like, you know,
probably at least two or three little
buttons that offer you installment loans
on your purchases. And obviously the
concern is whether or not people are
taking out credit that they shouldn't
necessarily be. There's a big discussion
about that and also the transparency of
the credit that they're taking out.
>> Right? This is we have uh you know and
we'll get into this there uh there are
pros and cons I guess relative to credit
cards. But one thing with credit cards
is that there is decades and decades of
data on them and we know how they're
used and there's really good risk
profiling and scores and all this like
credit scoring and all this stuff. BNPL
is sort of more novel and so therefore
to what degree do we know how as as an
asset or as a function it performs
across different uh cycles. Do we know
the cohort cohort of people who use BNPL
as well as we know the people the types
of people who use credit cards? Seems a
little bit a minimum a bit more
ambiguous.
>> Absolutely.
>> Well um we've sort of hinted at what
we're going to be talking about. I
mentioned PayPal. We talked about BNPL.
We are going to be speaking with one of
the original members [laughter] of the
PayPal mafia. We're going to be speaking
with Max Lechin. He is the founder and
CEO of a firm, one of the uh biggest
BNPL companies publicly traded. Max,
thank you so much for coming on OddLots.
>> Thank you for having me. I'm a big fan
of the show.
>> It's a bit of a privilege to be here.
>> Thank you for saying that on the
recording. It's We always love hearing
it, but we love when it's on the public
record as part of the uh episode. So, uh
thank you so much. Where did you get the
idea to start a firm? Um why did you
what what what prompted it?
>> A twosided coin both sides bad of
personal experience actually tying
neatly to the uh PayPal story. So I came
to the US at 16 from Soviet Union and so
you can imagine I understood very little
about borrowing and credit and things
like that. And so got my first credit
card on campus at college in at 18.
Didn't fully understand what I was
signing up for. Certainly didn't read
the fine print where it said 0%
asterisk. Don't worry about it. Borrowed
a bunch of money. Financed my first
startup from that very same credit card.
Promptly got into more that I could
afford to pay for. Startup failed.
Eventually got some nasty calls from
collectors. Paid it off and four years
later or five years later took this
little company PayPal public. Was
basically independently wealthy
overnight. went to buy a fancy car that,
you know, as I richly deserved at the
ripe age of 23, I I I wanted to show off
to my my then girlfriend, now wife, and
was declined for credit. And not only
did I feel completely screwed by the
moment where I found out that you're
supposed to make the minimum payment,
and by the way, interest acrrual
and this seemingly low APR is actually
not what it seems to be because I missed
some date of the specific amount that I
was supposed to pay. It sort of bit me
again five years later was like, "Oh, by
the way, it wrecked your credit rating,
too. So, you can't get a loan for
anything." Even as you're sort of
proudly sticking a finger at the article
in newspaper saying, you know, the
company public, youngest, whatever,
whatever. And so, that was a thing that
stayed with me for years. My friends
would prank me at restaurants. They
would ask the weight staff to tell me
that my credit card was declined, which
by then was a different credit card. I
would turn beat purple and basically be
like, "Oh my god, like it happened
again." Like what? And you know,
eventually I knew it was a joke, but I
was in my mid30s when I realized that
that's now more likely a joke than that
credit score bite from 18. And so in my
late 30s, I sat down with a friend from
high school, college, and PayPal. So,
you know, I have many of these friends
who' sort of I met when I was just
getting my feet wet in America. And
ultimately, we all, you know, we built
this amazing company together. and asked
him the sort of the obvious question 20
years too late. Why didn't we try to fix
that yuck that comes with having credit
cards as a young person? And he said,
you know, I don't know, but we built so
much great AI at PayPal fighting fraud
and doing all these really interesting
things. Surely we could do a better job
scoring credit for young people like you
were at 18 and then 23 than what
currently happens. And that that was
sort of the seminal moment. And you
know, a couple years later, we started a
firm.
>> So, I have a bunch of questions already.
Firstly, what kind of car was it? Did
you get it in the end?
>> I had to pay cash for it. I actually
wired money. Um, and uh it would begin
like an 8 a.m. visit to a dealership.
Ended up like it's 5:00 p.m. Your wire
hasn't cleared yet. You can't drive off
this lot. And and it did, you know,
drama. Uh, at the time, don't judge me,
it was a black hardtop Mercedes
convertible.
>> Oh. And
>> no judgment at all.
>> I'm judging a little bit.
>> I was really young. I was very much
trying to impress the girl who's now my
wife and the mother of
>> It clearly worked.
>> It worked. It worked. It worked.
>> Okay. Um, another question. So, you
>> I just want to say I love those old M
those Mercedes. I think that's those
that's one of the if I if I have some
ref conception, no judgment at all. I
think those those are great design cars.
Anyway, can you
>> should we just talk about cars?
>> Yeah, we could.
>> Okay. Um, well, you mentioned the
underwriting process and this in my mind
is supposed to be what makes the buy now
pay later BNPL model different, right?
Like the underwriting process is more
technologically driven, perhaps more
nuanced. Talk to us about what you do
differently versus, you know, a credit
card company or a bank or someone like
that.
>> Sure. And you're you're pulling in a
thread that's going to take a long time
to unwind. I'll try to be pissy but uh
this is where the the rage kicks in. So
one of the things that happens with
credit cards at the very core they tell
you a bunch of things they don't
actually want you to do. So credit card
business model is acrruel of interest
into principle. So this exponential
function of you're signing up for APRX,
but you don't actually know what's going
to cost you is all the fact that as you
make the minimum payments or the what
whatever the payments you're making,
whatever you haven't paid off, the
interest that you've accured folds right
into the principal and it compounds and
compounds and compounds. And so the
longer you take to pay it back, the more
it will cost, which seems obvious, but
it's impossible for most mere mortals to
predict. and they love it when you're
late because there are late fees which
are fixed. And so the less you spend,
the higher the percentage the late fee
represents. So it's this sort of amazing
business model which is why you know
your one of your recent episodes puzzled
over how how are these rates so high.
The rates themselves are actually not
the problem. The problem is the
structure as you fold interest into
principle and pay and pay and pay late
fees. It can be extraordinarily
expensive. And so from the very
beginning of a firm, we asked the
question, how can we make a product
where you don't have this weird
misalignment of interests? Where the
lender tells you, please pay your bills
on time, but what they're saying so is
but not too on time and ideally take as
long as possible because that's when we
make the most money. So the obvious
answer is of course obvious. Make a plan
that you commit as a lender that you'll
never change and don't charge late fees.
And that's it. If you agree to those
design principles, you are not going to
make more money if someone is late. And
you're not going to make more money if
they take longer to pay you back.
Obviously, you'll make less money
because getting money to lend isn't free
either. we have to pay for our sources
of capital as you know as everybody else
does which means that it immediately
rotates you sort of 180 degrees where
you say I only want to lend money when I
have a lot of conviction the person is
going to pay me back on time because if
they don't I am just going to lose money
and so we put those two principles down
in the ground very very early on it's
literally written down to the foundation
of the company we will not misalign
ourselves with our borrowers from that
came a lot of things like hey we need to
understand your cash flow We don't
really care what your credit rating is.
Maybe you gained it. Maybe it's
inaccurate. Maybe you're 18-year-old
immigrant. Does not matter. We need to
understand what your actual capability
is. We have to have the right to tell
you you are overextending yourself. Not
just once every few years when you renew
your credit card agreement, but for
every transaction. You have to be able
to underwrite and decide yes or no for
every single moment that you create
these payment plans because that allows
us to not lose money because we're
aligned with you. When you pay us back
on time, we'll make some money. if you
don't, we're just going to be worse off.
And so that is the foundation of a
firm's take on BNPL. Many people have
come along since and sort of changed the
model a little bit. They introduced late
fees, all kinds of other fees. We never
have and never will. But even with those
modifications, the model is still better
than credit cards because of this
individual underwriting moments. In our
case, no fees of any kind. Just to be
clear, so let's say I wind up at some
website and maybe I want to buy like
some Nikes or something like that and I
see the affirm option. How does how do
you know how good of a credit I am in
that moment?
>> So it's not a effort-free thing for you
to use affirm. You'll have to click on a
firm and we will ask you if we've never
seen you before. We'll ask you to
provide some information for us. That
information will allow us to tap into
the standard set of records that the
credit bureau's aggregated a value. If
there's enough data there for us to use
our custom credit score, we'll render a
decision based on that. If there's not,
we'll actually say, "Hey, we don't fully
understand your personal financial
situation. We would like to have a peak
at your bank account cash flow and
decide how your cash es and flows
relative to your ability to pay us
back." All of this is made possible with
really good new technology. So this
takes seconds even though it probably
takes about as long to do as it takes to
describe it. But we'll look through your
personal financial state of right now
and make a decision not just whether
it's a yes or no but also how much of a
risk you have of that financial
situation changing and that price is the
credit.
>> Do you use any like creative data
points? You mentioned um checking
against like the type of item that
people are buying. So, that's one thing
I imagine could be interesting, like if
people are buying groceries on
installment, does that mean they're more
of a credit risk than someone who's I
don't know, buying a computer or a big
ticket item? And then the other thing
I'm very curious about, and I think I've
told this story before on OddLots, but I
remember going to see um a startup that
eventually failed uh and they were in
the peer-to-peer lending space, and they
described some of the stuff they were
doing with underwriting where they were
like trying to measure people's
impulsiveness by how quickly they moved
a slider for a loan and stuff like that,
which freaked me out a little at the
time.
>> It would freak me out, too. So uh no we
do not do uh telemetry as a input
variable into underwriting. So before I
get into what we do use it bears
mentioning that the variables you use in
underwriting is a very very highly
regulated domain of lending and
underwriting. There's lots and lots of
laws going back quite far. Things like
Fair Credit Act and any other sort of
subsequent additions to both federal and
state level law that prohibits you from
using kind of the obvious things you
wouldn't want people to use like your
race or your gender or your age or your
creed cannot be a factor. It's actually
a federal offense to do that. And so we
don't do any of those things. We go as
far as to say if it correlates to some
of those things, we also couldn't use
it. And that that too is a subsequent
law as well. So, so first of all, we're
very very thoughtful about making sure
we don't step into a prohibited
territory. It's called prohibited basis
is the the fancy term in the industry.
What we can use and what we do use, as
you mentioned, merchants share with us
what's being purchased.
Despite the burrito gate that sometimes
uh comes back in the press, people don't
actually use a firm to finance Mexican
food or other cuisines. Uh they do
sometimes use a firm for groceries, but
it mostly is or almost entirely really
is for things like I'm throwing a giant
party and I need several hundred worth
of food stuffs and that's a lot to pay
down with my debit card so I'm going to
use a firm instead. So the average size
transactions for us is roughly $300. So
just gives you a sense for like what
people use a firm for. So
that's just you know appropo appropo
where it's being used what we glean from
the information about what's being
purchased.
One good mental model which this is like
an approximation but but a decent one.
If the useful life of the item is
meaningfully shorter than the time it
takes you to pay it back,
you may find yourself questioning the
quality of the item long after it's
disappeared. And so a natural question
we should be asking is
what do we understand about this item?
But also maybe this item's history of
quality
before we say oh yeah sure buy this
thing that's going to be out in six
months and pay for it over two years. So
maybe the most useful thing I can say
about actually what variables what new
variables we've introduced into our
underwriting vast vast vast majority of
them in fact all of them actually it
influence the decision we make by one or
two% at most anytime someone tells you I
found this magic variable and if I just
look at that it's like 30% better
underwriting or 5% better defaults
they're lying probably to themselves
more than to you but they're definitely
lying anything like that just
immediately becomes brittle as the
macroeconomic reality changes as people
suddenly don't care about the item or
whatever it is that they found that's
this magic bullet of like suddenly I
know who's a good risk it just
disappears and so you actually want lots
and lots of subtle factors that are also
compliant with all the various
regulations helping you shape a score
that will tell you how likely this
person is to pay you back and and that's
what we use
>> let's go back to the just the core of
the business model. So let's imagine
there is a shirt that costs a $100 and I
have an opportunity to okay I'm gonna
buy it uh with a firm so it'll be four
payments of $25 and there's no interest
and so for me that is almost a free
lunch because the time value of money
etc. All right, I'm spreading this out
over four payments.
>> You're going to put that hundred in an
index fund.
>> I'm going to that extra that extra $75
after the first payment. I'm going to
No. And so you make money because the
retailer is paying you a cut because
that you've brought someone into the
door. So talk about how is that cut
determined? What is how much are they
paying you for that and how competitive
is it against other potential BNPL
companies or perhaps new entrance that
haven't come into the market yet? Talk
to us about how that price is formed.
>> This is my question too because when you
go to check out you see buttons and the
buttons I presume don't mean that much
to people. You just click one of them.
So, how do you differentiate yourself?
>> We've been around for nearly 15 years.
And the way we've differentiated
ourselves, by the way, we basically
don't advertise. When you see us at
checkout, that's when you learn about a
firm at some point and then you come
back to use again. And we have
incredible retention rates. People who
have used a firm a couple of times
basically with some 90% probability will
come back to use a firm again. Not
necessarily the next week. In fact, we
average something like five plus
transactions per year. But when it
matters to them, they will use a firm.
And the way we differentiate ourselves
is we were there for them when they
needed us. And if they ever stumbled,
our best customers are the ones that
email us or call us and say, "Hey, I was
late to pay my bill. Something happened.
What's the late fee?" And we tell them
there isn't one. That's the moment when
they grasp how we're different from the
rest of the industry. And that that's
probably why they come back to us as as
often as much as they do. something like
95% of our transactions come from repeat
customers. So, just to give you a sense
for the loyalty that we've engendered in
our user base without ever making
promises, you know, and on broadcast
media. That's sort of why they come back
to the business model point. So, first
of all, probably worth expanding the
aperture a little bit. So, we offer both
interest free and not interest free
loans. The paying for that Joe described
is exactly as it sounds. So, in our
case, there are no fees of any kind. So,
if you see a $100 shirt and you say,
"I'm it's going to be four payments of
$25." That is it. You cannot you can
take a decade and you wouldn't be able
to use a firm pretty soon after you went
well past the window of repayment. So,
the punishment for for being late for
too long is, hey, you need to pay us
back actually before you can do this
again, which I think stands to reason
much more than actually let us hit you
with a $38 late fee. But that's besides
the point. So, that's one form of
transaction. We also have what we call
longer term zeros, which is for a $1,000
fancy suit, you could potentially get a
loan from a firm for 24 months or even
36 months, which will also be zero. In
both of those cases, it's the retailer
that's effectively paying your interest.
Time value of money becomes even more
expensive at 36 months. So, you you've
sort of you you've nailed the business
model there. In some situations, the
retailer just doesn't have the margin or
isn't interested in paying your
interest. And so, they'll say, "Look,
you're going to use credit card. you'll
pay some interest if you're going to use
a firm. It's okay for for us to have
this transaction happen if you are
willing to pay interest to a firm. And
in that scenario, you will see both the
principal and interest. We'll calculate
it for you both the rate and the dollars
and we'll show you the schedule. And
before you commit to any of that, you
will see and agree to the schedule that
we agree on. In the latter case, the
consumer is paying us something. The
merchant is probably paying us something
significantly less than what they're
paying us if they're absorbing the cost
of interest, the cost of time, value of
money. The business model is really
really simple in our case to understand
the value is fixed. So whoever is paying
us almost doesn't matter that has to
cover the fixed cost of underwriting
servicing all the usual bits leave a
little bit for us to actually be a
profitable company which we are and uh
also absorb the probability of default
which by the way sort of all the way
back to this alignment of incentives an
easy check like so didn't work like this
whole idea of like oh you know you're
just not going to profit when people
stumble. Our delinquency rates are about
half the industry of credit cards. That
should give you a sense for we don't
make nearly as many mistakes or perhaps
we are not willing to let people go late
because we don't benefit from it. Back
to the business model. That's how it
works. Um the competitiveness of this
industry is just like any other
competitiveness of any payment industry.
Payments are notoriously a competitive
world. There's actually never been a
monopoly in payments. Full stop. There's
a fun puzzle I sort used to do this at
cocktail parties like name a monopoly in
payments. It turns out there has never
been one. I go to
>> like an allots cocktail party.
>> Yeah.
>> I you know there's a reason I'm a fan of
the show, right? I I I listen to uh to
to you applying on all sorts of esoteric
things with with Greg Gusta. Uh and so I
think that's will tell you everything
you want to know about the
competitiveness of the of the space. But
we have decided from the very beginning
that we want transparency and honesty
with everyone involved with our
borrowers. That's why we say everything
up front. That's why we tell them here's
your disclosure on exactly the rates and
the schedules. With our merchants, we
tell them here is the price you will
have to pay us if that's what you're
paying.
If you can't don't want to, that's fine.
We will probably not be the right one
for you. We won't make it up elsewhere.
We're not going to take it out of the
consumer's hide when they least expect
it. That's just not the brand. There are
definitely cheaper providers out there.
There are plenty of brands that'll say
we're just like a firm but way less
expensive for merchants. What that
really means is that's because we charge
all sorts of hidden fees. We have all
sorts of other ways of taking it out of
consumer skin. What this means
practically with 15 years of experience
is consumers as they cast their eye over
the list of buttons, they say, "Well,
the one I want to use is the one that's
not going to get me if I stumble." And
that makes for 24 million active users
in the last 12 months. and we feel like
we've we've kept our promise and the
consumers keep coming back.
>> Just reiterating Joe's question though,
um on the merchant side, again, I
imagine they're getting offers from a
bunch of different um installment
lenders, BNPL companies, and I don't
think they do. They care much about the
underwriting. It's not really their
problem. It's your problem, right? So I
assume the thing they care most about is
the fee which seems like
>> they actually care about three things.
>> Okay.
>> So they absolutely care about the fee
like that goes without saying which
which can range from as low as less than
credit card. So a typical credit card
rate today is on the order of between
two and a half and 3% depending on the
size of the merchant. But that's kind of
the average in the industry. we will
definitely meet you around those numbers
at the absolute lowest and goes up all
the way to let's say low singledigit
percentage points when you are
subsidizing consumer interest. So we are
not a cheaper than credit cards provider
like that that's not you know don't want
anybody to have that illusion. They care
about the rate more than the rates they
care about incremental sales. So, if
your next marginal buyer is either a no
thanks or it will cost you 5%. If you
have the margin of better than 5%, you
don't want the item staying on your
shelves. You would like to pay this 5%
to get the marginal buyer to say yes.
And so, because of that incentive, which
I think is easy to follow, you do have
lots and lots of merchants that say,
"All right, so what I really care about
then is the approval rates," which is
the second variable they care about. So,
as people come through and say, "Hey,
I'm not going to use a credit card. Not
interested in buying unless I have an
installment load, let's say, from a
firm," they need to know that that
rate's going to be high enough.
Otherwise, why have a button that just
sits there and looks pretty? And so, our
rates are typically higher than the rest
of the industry because we are so
obsessed with underwriting because we
have no crutches, eg late fees. And so,
this underwriting thing, I we don't we
don't really try to explain it to
merchants at all. What we do say is look
at our approval rates. If you see their
approvals rates are meaningfully higher
than the industry, you know, you're
going to get value from this. That's why
it's worth paying more than credit
cards. And so that is true and that that
that's that's what they do. The third
piece they do care about, every merchant
knows that the second transaction is the
one they want. The first transaction
costs them probably more than the margin
in it. They're paying Google, they're
paying Facebook, they'll soon be paying
an LLM provider or a chatbot provider to
drive that first transaction in. They
want to sell you another thing. So they
very much care about if they had sold
that first transaction using a buy now
pay later provider it better not harm
their brand because if the buy now pay
provider is harassing the consumer for
paying them back or has late fees or has
unexpected fees it's going to accrete
negatively to the merchants's brand and
so they actually do care about late fees
in a way that has less to do with
financial consequences but more with
will people come back to us and use a
firm again or will they be like ah I
hated that merchant and I got into some
bad transaction. So that they they care
about all these things through their own
lens.
>> Um that makes a lot of sense. So let's
say I start accepting your premise.
Okay, this is per se better than um
credit cards. One reason that people
can't just sort of quit credit cards
generally is not every place takes buy
now pay later. Um people want something
in their wallet, right? That they want
something at the restaurant and wherever
it is that they know it's going to be
accepted. Now firm, you are launching a
card or you have a card, right?
>> We have a card been around for a couple
years.
>> So you have a card, but I'm curious, you
know, you you mention you referenced
that recent episode that we did with
Drexler and one of the things that he
said about cards is they're very costly
to advertise. The marketing expenditure
for the card companies is very high. You
mentioned that you don't do a lot of
advertising. I'm curious though on the
card component specifically. Is that
going to be, you know, if you want to be
quote top of wallet to consumers, the
first thing I think I've read that
phrase. I saw
>> that's great. I I'm laughing because
[laughter]
>> I'm trying to acquaint myself with the
industry lingo.
>> You're you're true insider that TMW that
that's
so if you want to be top of wallet for
the consumer in in the card, can you do
that with an advertising light model or
do you really need to spend to get
significant wallet share?
>> You can. The card is available to our
users. So this is not a thing that you
will see on time square displays. This
is a thing you find out from a firm once
you are a borrower. Once you're actually
in good standing, you qualify for the
affirm card as the hey, you really liked
us, didn't you? This was great. You're
transacting five times a year. If you
want to take us with you to your retail
shopping experiences, restaurant or
otherwise, we have a way. It's called
the Affirm card. It's actually pretty
magical. The card is a dual mode card.
It switches from debit to credit
explicitly as you tell it to. So when
you're buying a burrito, we expect you
to use the debit mode, which just
literally takes the money from your
account and that's it. There's no
interest, obviously. It's just a pay now
transaction. If you're buying a TV, you
can buy it now with a firm in the app.
You say, "Hey, my next transaction, I
want that to be a 12 months. Maybe it's
a 0% loan because the retailer wants you
to have it interest free. Maybe you're
paying some interest, but you're setting
up that transaction in the app and then
your card is ready when you tap it next
time. It becomes a load automatically.
It's a pretty magical experience. It's
super popular. It's a it's a thing that
we haven't needed to advertise because
we went from we have this card idea to
about 12% of our users having one very
very quickly because it's just a really
really good product. Again, our user
their mindset has long been changed from
revolving is okay. I don't understand
it, but I don't care to I don't like
revolving. I don't want to pay late
fees. I don't want to pay excessive
interest. This affirm thing is neat. The
card is a logical next step. It's how
much more can I have of this type of
financial life.
>> How much insight do you have into um how
much people are borrowing from other
BNPL lenders? So, the sort of stacking
issue which has been discussed multiple
times now. It's a great question. Um, we
have a decent insight in the sense that
we understand pretty well the overlap
between user basis. So there there's two
prongs to this answer and this one is
worth delving into pretty deeply because
this this is where we differ from the
rest of the industry pretty
significantly. So before I get into the
stacking part, I'll I'll address the uh
the overlap. So we do a lot of studying
just externally through surveys also
because when we log into your bank
account or we ask a provider to log into
your bank account and pull in some of
your transactional data we get a a
glimpse into what else you're spending
money on. So we had have a decent sense
for where else you might be using buy
now pay later. And to date the user base
overlap with other providers is quite
minimal. So there's not a whole lot of
stacking possibilities simply because
people who use Affirm tend to stay with
Affirm. They sometimes stray and use
other providers, but it's quite minimal
for a meaningfully lower transactional
amount. I think we average a
significantly higher average transaction
relative to the rest of the industry. So
far that's not been a problem. In the
long term, you of course can make the
argument like, sure, right now you guys
are all still tiny. You're growing
really quickly. Everybody's taking a
bite out of the credit card industry.
What happens five years from now when
everyone has signed up for their
favorite BNPL and they're now signing up
for a second one? The right way to
address this problem, and this is the
right way, and it's it's traditionalist
of me, but I I really do believe it's
the right way, is for everyone to report
to the credit bureaus. Today, when we
tap into one of the three major credit
bureaus, we see what you're borrowing
and relatively current state of your
borrowing from other traditional source
of of credit. And it is a variable that
we use inside of our own underwriting. A
firm today is the only one that
furnishes, that's another fancy industry
term, delivers the data of both positive
and negative as in you're on time,
you're not on time to the credit
bureaus. The rest of our competitive set
generally speaking does not. Although
everyone has experimented a little bit
from the very beginning, we saw the idea
of building credit history and improving
credit scores for people who are on time
as a key value proposition for our
borrower. Like we are not going to be
the only lender for our consumers. They
need to borrow for a car. They need to
borrow for a house one day. That means
whatever they're doing with us,
especially if they're doing well, which
97% of our consumers are doing really,
really well. They're on time all the
time. it has to reflect in their
permanent record somehow. So we've been
furnishing basically from the very
beginning. It took a long time to
persuade not just the credit bureaus but
also the companies that provide
traditional credit scores to understand
the data we furnish and treat it in the
right way so that when you are on time
the scores go up when you're not on time
the scores go down etc. So we did all
that work basically on a volunteer basis
over the last decade and today right now
the state of the industry is if you are
a BNP BNPL provider and you're not
furnishing data you kind of have no
excuse like we pioneered this. We did
all the work. We worked with the score
builders and the credit bureaus and
we're now sending all of our data. And
so we want everyone to join us because
most people do pay on time. their credit
histories should reflect their good
repayment, but also people who should
not be borrowing should be reflected.
And I think that that's just really
really important. If I can uh if I can
do one bit of advertising on your show,
it won't be for a firm. It will be
all of you out there. If you are in a by
now pay industry, furnish your damn
data. It will help consumers and it'll
eventually accrete to your brand, too.
But for now, we are the only major one.
>> Wait, what's the resistance then?
because it seems kind of obvious if
everyone cares about the underwriting
you would want more data out there so
why not provide it.
>> So I don't want to pretend that I
understand all the motivations but I
think a basic inferential thought might
occur that if you're making a lot of
money from late fees it's a cool thing
to tell your consumers don't worry you
can just pay me off and it won't go on
your permanent record. And if you don't
make any money from late fees, you have
no incentive to tell your consumers,
"Oh, it's okay. Just pay me some
something and uh we won't tell on you."
The connection between late fees and
lack of reporting is unfortunately the
uh the underlying fact. And because we
don't make any money from late fees
because we don't charge any, we're very
pro reporting.
>> Just out of curiosity, since you're
talking about late fees and credit and
all that stuff, here we are recording
this on December 2nd, 2025. You have any
uh take the temperature of the consumer
for us. How how are things doing? Seeing
any signs of growing missed payments or
anything like that?
>> Not as of December 2nd, 2025.
>> The important thing to understand I I
I'm asked this question fairly often. I
am a great I am a firm is a great lens
into the financial hearts and minds of
North American consumer. We operate in
the US, Canada and now UK. uh it is a
specific set of people. These people are
more financially responsible. They made
a conscious choice. They picked us not
just because it's installment pay and
yeah, it's convenient. It's also because
we told them we don't charge late fees.
It's also because we told them you hate
the asterisk next to the 0%. We don't
have any asterisks. One of our core
values is no fine print and we mean it.
And on and on and on. And so it stands
to reason that affirmed consumers will
be probably much later into any kind of
a macroeconomic earthquake territory if
there was one to come. But as of right
now, we're we we feel quite good about
our book and also about the US consumer.
>> Um I'm going to ask you a question and
uh I'm going to mention a competitor. I
won't make you name the competitor, but
I'll just say it my question then ask
you about. So, one of your competitors,
CLA, recently announced a new dollar peg
stable coin, and I'm very cynical. And
so, when I see like random companies
announcing some crypto thing, like
sometimes it makes sense, but um but
often it's like, well, maybe is this
just a good press release or something
like that, and I haven't really looked
at the Cla one, etc., But for you, a
firm right now, when you look at and you
as someone who has been in the internet
payment trenches for literally decades
right now, does do stable coins or
anything crypto unlock anything for you
right now when you think about the
future and you think about opportunities
that you can't do with traditional
rails?
>> The short answer is I don't think so.
>> Now, I'm I'm also very cynical. So I
think you're unfortunately tapping into
the exact same mind flow that that you
have.
>> This is our way of luring them to want
to come on the podcast and argue against
it. But keep going. Keep going.
>> I you know I I am confident that
there is some thought that went to the
press release. So I I I don't think it's
a pure [laughter] press release. So
>> I I will I will
>> I hope so. Yeah.
>> Just talk tell us about I won't make you
we're not going to make you speculate on
what you're competitive but just tell us
about from the affirm perspective. Sure.
I I I will uh straw man on the reasons
why yes. So why not is obvious. I think
you you you probably can do much better
job than I can. The why yes. So there
are a couple of reasons. One in general
if you have a lot of crossber commerce
foreign exchange the complexity of just
diligence around you know everything
from sanctions to reserve accounts etc.
you can sort of squint a little and say,
you know what, if we just lived in
dollar pegged stable coins everywhere
all at once, it would be a little bit
easier. And I think that's true.
E-commerce is not a very significantly
crossborder discipline. And so before
you sort of say, oh, wouldn't it be
amazing if I bought lots of things from
Zanzibar and just paid them with a firm,
but they got stable coin as a settlement
currency, they'll be very happy because
they want dollars and this thing is
essentially dollar equivalent. It's a
good story just most people in the US
don't buy a lot of things from Zanzibar
like they buy some things in other
countries but most of the time because
we all want things shipped to us very
very quickly we're probably buying it
from a US subsidiary that's warehouses
somewhere pretty close to the US and so
it's not that big of a market just yet
but in like five years if you see me
putting out a press release it's not
because I finally realized that I'm
missing out it's because there's enough
crossber commerce in our scale where it
starts to make a difference that's the
best I got in terms of why would you
want to do this the obvious of why not.
It's like, well, maybe you want to move
money around person to person, but
that's not our business. Maybe you want
to believe that one day Joe will have a
wallet full of stable coins. I really
have a hard time imagining you sporting
a whole bunch of different kinds of
branded dollar pegged effectively
equivalent stable coins like a coupon
book of I got my firm stable coin and my
brand XYZ stable coin and I'm going to
choose between the two. Like none of
that. maybe solve the re like what about
for like rewards like you know that's
one thing that credit cards currently
have that like oh I get miles like could
there be something with if I use the
stable coin I get remitted but I don't
know I'm just I'm just throwing stuff
out so for what it's worth I spent a lot
of my time contemplating the reward
ecosystem and mostly raging against it
because it is one of the less documented
wealth transfers and by the way the
credit card industry in general is a
regressive wealth transfer where people
who never revolve transactors like
probably both of you and and me when I
do use credit cards which is really rare
these days. We're paying our bills at
the end of the month. We're not paying a
penny of interest. I think Joe's on the
record saying you've never paid any
interest. And so I think that's a that
that that that's a nice place to be if
you can afford it. Telling people that
they should just not borrow and pay it
off at the end of the month is an
incredibly let them eat cake equivalent
for the 21st century payments. Lots of
people in America revolve half the
country revolves at $10,000. And so the
idea of those people caring about
rewards is sort of preposterous. They do
not. They they care about making their
minimum payment. People who are figuring
out which reward scheme they want to be
a part of,
I'm just not so convinced that they're
going to be calcul expanding their
horizons to have more stable coins
because ultimately they're just getting
dollars. In the world of a firm, people
that are con people that that we serve
every single day, 24 million of them in
the last 12 months, they really really
care about the interest rates they pay
because a lot of them understand that
the alternative is revolving. And so for
them being told, hey, your reward is a
0% loan is incredibly powerful. And so
before we get into using our hard-earned
revenue into stable coins, we will just
give it back to the consumers in a form
of no interest. H. So, we talked about
how you make money, but we should talk a
little bit about your cost side as well.
And you you mentioned funding earlier.
So, you have to get money from somewhere
and you're paying for that money. What
levers do you have to pull if the cost
of money goes up? And again, I'm aware
that we're recording this in early
December and everyone expects an
imminent rate cut, but in theory, if
interest rates were to go up, what could
you do to offset that additional cost?
>> So, the most important thing to
understand about our business from the
capital sourcing part of the game,
everyone understands that rates are not
super volatile, but you know, if you
look back a couple of years, they were
very volatile.
for for a brief not so shining moment.
And so we all knew it was possible. So
all of our contracts
with various lenders of money to us, but
also people who will buy our loans, they
all adjust fairly gently over a course
of a fairly long period of time. So it's
not about can we deal with rising costs
of credit for us, it's how quickly do
they change for us. And of course, we
understand that they might change
quickly. Therefore, a lot of our
contracts stipulate that, hey, if they
do move up, the adjustments to our cost
will go fairly slowly over a period of
time. So, the more likely outcome in
December is probably a downward motion
of the credit rates or perhaps they stay
steady. But just the same as I
described, we're not going to wake up to
25 free basis points of incredible
revenue. It will eventually come to us
in a form of incredible margin, but
it'll take its time because these
contracts adjust both up and down quite
slowly and we're in no way unique in the
industry. Everybody does that. The
levers we have to deal with such cost
changes are exactly what you would
expect. So we will either pass it
through to the consumers and moving up
in the increments or down of 25 basis
points is not that significant and most
people I think generally don't care that
much. In some cases, we actually choose
to tell, hey merchant X, you are
providing these rates for nothing. You
should continue doing so, but the cost
to you will go up a tiny bit because
the rates have changed. Now, because of
time value of money, the merchants pay
us in real time. Essentially, as a
transaction is consummated, the true
cost to them is truly dimminimous. And
so, in either of these two cases, so
long as the movements are not very
violent, it's not that major a component
of our business. I just have one last
question. AI. So, setting aside the
technology for the underwriting um which
I'm sure is a very high-tech data
inensive application and setting aside
that probably many of your engineers on
staff are using code generating for
that. Um, just putting your tech hat on
as someone who oversees a large
organization, people looking for how
large language models in particular are
being deployed in productive capacity.
At a firm today, is any of this
technology in use in production and
saving human hours in some respect or
another?
>> Yes, emphatically so. So, we just
wrapped up the
Cyber Weekend, Turkey 5, Black Friday,
Cyber Monday, whatever, whatever you
want to call. I don't actually have the
stat yet because I will get the report
immediately after this podcast is
recorded, but I'm confident we
Well, I probably can't uh pre-announce
the results. We we report early next
year, but we we will have handled tens
of thousands of consumer contacts,
people saying everything from, hey, I
just borrowed money from you and I don't
understand when my first payment is due
and you know, maybe it's because they
hadn't read the email list clearly or or
everything all the way down to I just
borrowed money and I realized that I
need a refund because I actually have no
intention of buying this thing and all
that stuff. And a lot of it we try to
serve them in real time as they're
transacting. with plenty of people
contact us right after or maybe sometime
you know after the purchase a huge
percentage of that is handled entirely
by AI now that has not caused us to lay
off our wonderful customer service staff
at all what it has allowed us to do is
to go really deep into specialization AI
is very very good today at handling
basic questions it can do cool things
like look up your account and say no
you're not late you're mistaken don't
worry about it or yes you're late but we
don't charge late fees, so just please
make yourself current and we'll we'll
move on. All of that can be handled by
AI wonderfully. If it's something like I
changed my name or you know I I changed
where I live right as I was consummating
this transaction there all sorts of
crazy things that come up kind of that
is something that a human can handle. AI
models are not smart enough yet to
handle some of these things and also
presumably enough we wouldn't want the
possibility of hallucination to derail
what is a good customer relationship. So
we've been able to move our human
helpers into a much more sophisticated
much more specific role. So the theme in
our customer service for the last year
has been specialization, specialization,
specialization where we train people now
to serve very very specific subset of
problems because they can be effective
and move faster. And so these tools are
actually making them more efficient by
letting them focus on just a very
specific thing that they're good at. So
that's one example. We track all sorts
of interesting metrics about AI tool
usage internally.
The interesting or sort of random
factoid, our engineering group is not
the single largest consumer of AI tools.
I I will not reveal exactly who it is.
And by the way, like vast majority,
>> we cannot reveal who it is. [laughter]
>> Give us a hint or something.
>> Uh it's actually finance. Uh our our uh
finance group uses these tools
obsessively.
I'm I'm cheating a little bit here. So
for a very long time, it's not the case
anymore, but for a very long time
because we are so AI and MLheavy
company, one of the core requirements
for any employee, but certainly in
finance was you have to know how to read
code and probably write code. And so
huge percentage of what we do in our
finance group actually looks a lot like
coding and a lot of software engineering
and so but they're somehow maybe because
it's a smaller group on average, but uh
they they're great adopters of these
tools. Our legal team uses it all the
time. Uh we have literally hundreds of
thousands of very custom contracts.
Every time a merchant pays your interest
for you, they signed up for it
contractually. That's a custom contract.
Imagine managing half a million of these
things. They're all carefully written
and bespoken. So AI can read and find
errors and corrections, etc., etc. We
use So one of the things that we're
responsible for as a regulated business
is we cannot allow merchants to
advertise our service incorrectly. We're
actually on the hook. When a merchant
says something like, "Hooray, affirm
interest free for everyone." It's not
true. Some people will actually pay some
interest sometimes. And so we have to we
are responsible for finding that and
telling the merchant, "Please stop
saying things that aren't strictly
speaking true." AI tools are amazing at
reading boatloads of advertising copy
and saying, "Hey, wait a second. That is
inaccurate. We got to fire off an email
and tell this merchant to fix it." So
you can sort of imagine a flood of ideas
that we had with the Chad GBT moment
happen to work for the last few years. H
I'm going to end with um a sort of
theoretical question, a big picture
theoretical question, but if you could
design the ideal payment system
from scratch, complete scratch, you
know, using today's technology, there's
no legacy card networks, maybe not even
legacy banks. What would it look like?
And how much of a firm's current
business model would sort of survive in
that environment?
Oh, I think it would look an awful lot
like a firm. A firm is my personal
attempt to build a system that I can be
proud about. One of the core things we
tell people who join us, one of the
reasons we had this such a black and
white, no late fees, no compounding, no
deferred interest, none of the yuck, is
because I wanted the smartest people
that would have otherwise gone to Wall
Street and traded in quant funds to join
us and build the system that they could
be proud about. It's very hard to be
proud about a thing that makes half its
money in late fees and that's why we
don't do it. And so what we've built is
biased as I am is pretty darn great. It
really is something that I'm very proud
about and I think the totality of the
team here takes an enormous amount of
pride in how we went about building
this. It is dependent and intertwined
with the legacy systems. But even as we
go through card rails to use another
industry jargon or many other systems
that have existed when we tap into
capital markets which has certainly been
here long before we came about and
everything else in between we maintain
the moral integrity of the product and
its DNA all the way through. We might
pay late fees if we borrow money to
lend. We we haven't because obviously
we're on a pretty tight ship here. It
will not be passed through. We take an
incredible amount of pride in the
diligence we exercise within the system
all the way down to leaving a penny on
the table for our partners to keep
because we refuse to make more money
than we said we would. And so I would
love to have a blank sheet design
exercise and payments, but I think what
would emerge is a system that looks a
lot like a firm, just doesn't have some
of the 1980s croft in it.
>> Max Levchin, founder and CEO of a firm.
So great chatting with you. very uh
illuminating, helpful conversation and I
appreciate you coming on Loblots. Tracy,
I thought that was great. I thought that
was really interesting and just sort of
understanding the real nuts and bolts
about how the money is made and what's
different about the uh BNPL companies
from the credit card companies. To my
mind, very helpful conversation.
>> Yeah, I thought it was really
interesting uh the discussion about why
other BNPL companies don't want to
report to um the credit bureaus and
things like that. Uh, you know, I wonder
if that'll change um anytime soon. Maybe
politicians will start getting
interested in it, regulators as the
space expands.
>> A thought that I had listening to Max
was um he mentioned the sort of the
regressiveness of the point system,
right? So there's people like us who
rarely roll their credit card debt but
get frequent flyer miles or other
rewards, etc. But that's paid for by the
people that roll, right? Or sorry,
that's paid for by the people that roll.
Now if a firm is targeting they're not
they're clearly targeting people who are
not thinking about points right they're
thinking about people who really do need
to extend their payments or implicitly
roll and say we have a better option. So
it's sort of cleaving off if you know if
this grows the firm is still just a $22
billion company uh by market cap but as
this grows you got to wonder like if if
in the maximum version where you've
cleaved off a significant number of
people who roll
>> what happens to the points ecosystem for
the people like us now granted I don't
think like oh what about the poor
freaking flyer and all the great rewards
you're getting but is
>> will someone think about the points
>> will someone please think about the
points uh accumulators who never go into
debt or who never like roll their debt.
But it is interesting to think about if
you could like cleave off that then a
big part of the business model of credit
card the legacy card companies could
potentially be unstable and part of the
appeal of going to any credit card that
offers a lot of rewards could decline if
revolvers move to this alternate
payments model.
>> Yeah, it's a really good point. Yeah,
>> it's a really good point on points.
[laughter] That one was a little
obvious. I'm sorry.
>> No, it's good. I like that one. It was
straightforward. I actually got this
one. Okay. Um, actually, you know what?
I really also appreciated that Max had
substantive answers for things that
they're doing with AI that aren't just
code generation. Even if it sounds like
the finance department is probably still
using it for code generation. Like, that
makes a lot of sense. Like being able to
proactively scan websites to say who is
sort of um claiming something that's not
true about a firm, etc. So, maybe there
are productive uses of all this
technology
>> or sending out millions and millions of
contracts automatically.
>> Totally.
>> All right. Shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the Odd
Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Aloway.
>> And I'm Jill Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Follow our guest Max
Levchin. He's at M Levchin. Follow our
producers Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen
dashennet atbot and Kellbrooks at
Kellbrooks.
>> And for more OddLots content, you should
definitely check out our daily
newsletter. You can find that at
bloomberg.com/odblots.
And you can join fellow listeners in
conversation 247 in our Discord,
discord.gg/outlots.
>> And if you enjoyed this conversation,
then please like, leave a comment, or
better yet, subscribe.
>> Thanks for watching. [music]
>> [music]